---
title: My Top Six Favorite Things at Maker Faire 2017
categories: [Maker]
tags: [sf,sfo,san-francisco,bay-area,maker,maker-faire,iot,hardware]
date: 2017-05-22
permalink: bamf2017
---

I just finished a long weekend in the San Francisco Bay area attending the now institutional Maker Faire.

This stalwort of all things maker is an inevitable blast. If you've ever been victim of makers block, this event will unstick you, and if you've ever been tempted to think that you were the most creative person on earth, this event will humble you right quick.

Here are the top 6 things I came across that I can't wait to research, order, make, and talk about...

## Maslow
{maslow}

## Microsoft Make Code
{ribbons}

I know it seems like it's cheating since I work for Microsoft, but hey, it's my blog.

And I have to pick this one because it the effect was just awesome.

Make Code is a new in-browser IDE from Microsoft that makes IoT development with a select few partner hardware boards about as simple as you can imagine. If you own a supported board (which we were giving away all weekend), check out these getting started steps...

1. browse to [makecode.com](http://makecode.com)
1. plug the device in to your USB port

That's it!

We had everyone from 5 to 95 walking through a tutorial to write their first IoT app, and it was brilliant to see so many lights turn on - on the boards and in the minds of the new IoT hackers that were being made.

While I'm on the subject of awesome Microsoft displays, you can't beat the Intelligent Kiosk app for Windows 10 that does a phenomenal job of showing of Microsoft Cognitive Services. This app take a picture every few seconds and runs it through Microsoft's Cognitive Services API. It does things like associate your face with a dog breed, guess your age and gender, or try to determine your emotion. The results are comical.

You can download the app yourself too. There was hardly a single moment the entire 3-day weekend that there wasn't a full crowd around each of two Intelligent Kiosk displays making silly faces and laughing out loud.

## (hydroponics)

## (goliath)

## (3d printer)

## (90 degree plywood furniture)

()